welcome back to micro one
in the first two weeks of the class we
have looked at static games where
players interact with each other exactly
once
now for those games we have introduced
two useful solution concepts
rationalizability and nash equilibria we
have been able to use those to gain some
insights about these static games
now in reality there aren't too many
interactions or strategic situations
where people get together
once they interact with each other once
and then they go their separate ways for
the rest of their lives
and in this week we want to look at a
perhaps more realistic setting where
player interact with each other's
dynamically over time
and
the main solution concepts that we will
look at this week is sub game perfection
now as a motivation consider the
situation where you and your friend are
both invited to a birthday party of a
third friend and because it's a birthday
party you need to bring a gift
now you and your friend decided that
you'll get a gift together so it's not
necessary that both you and your friend
get a gift
because coming up with a good idea for a
gift is hard
both of you prefer if the other one gets
the gift
now this strategic situation we can
write down as a game using the concepts
that we have learned in the first two
weeks
as a static game like this where we have
both players have two actions available
they can go straight to the party or
they can go buy a gift and the worst
possible situation here is if neither
buys a gift and both directly go to the
party this is very embarrassing
and the best possible outcome here is if
exactly
one person gets the gift but each
of you prefers if the other one is the
one to get it
now the way i chose this payoff matrix
here is
exactly the same way as in the crossing
intersections example so we already know
what the nash equilibria are there are
two pures have ginash equilibria where
one player goes by a gift
and then we know that there is a mixed
strategy nash equilibrium where both
players go by a gift with one-fifth
probability
now this is a
static game a simultaneous move game
which means that both you and your
friend decide at the same time whether
you will go buy a gift and you don't
communicate with each other
now we can think of a slight variation
of this game where
your friend gets off work first or
finishes studying first
and
we can
capture this dynamic interaction
using a game tree
so
the way a game tree is red is that there
are nodes in the tree that represent
sort of the state of the game
and
play in the game flows from the top of
the game tree to the bottom and for all
terminal payoffs here
each player will get some utility
now the first node your friend gets to
decide whether they will go buy a gift
or go straight to the party
and then
you will observe what what your friend
has done and then you will get to react
by also choosing to either get a gift or
going straight to the party
now
if you're rational
then you'll use information from your
friend what your friend has done
and if your friend has gone straight to
the party then you will go buy a gift
because you want to avoid the
embarrassing situation where you show up
without a gift
and if your friend has bought a gift
then you can go straight to the party
without worrying
and this is what your best response is
if you are rational
and your friend might know that you're
rational
and if your friend knows that you will
go buy a gift if they go straight to the
party then your friend can anticipate
this behavior and will optimally choose
to go
straight to the party because they'll
get one utility instead of zero if they
go by a gift themselves
and this
solution concept
what we have done here intuitively is we
have solved this game tree backwards so
we call this backward induction
and it's a very intuitive solution
concept and we will use it as a starting
point to define
soft game perfection
now what is important here
is that
your friend lets you know that they went
to the party
if they don't let you know then
then you don't necessarily best respond
with buying a gift
so we can represent this lack of
information
using information sets
an information set
is a set of nodes
where
the player whose information said it is
cannot distinguish between the different
nodes so in this example here your
friend doesn't tell you
whether they have gone to the party or
they bought a gift so you don't know at
which node in the tree you are
so you don't know whether you should um
buy a gift or whether you can go
straight to the party
so this shows that timing of actions
matters only
if some information about the chosen
actions is observed by the later players
otherwise this game is exactly identical
to the static games that we have looked
at for the last two weeks
now this game here cannot be solved by
backward induction because like i
mentioned
you don't know
whether this is the true state and you
should buy a gift or this is the true
state and you can go to the party and
this is precisely what we want to
generalize this week
so we will formally define extensive
form games which are those games with
game trees
and then we'll define sub-imperfect
equilibria which
extend
both backward induction as well as nash
equilibria which we have seen last week
and the approach that we're pursuing
is a very standard approach i would say
in
research or game theory or yeah i would
say in any research we start with
abstractly
describing
this intuitive solution concept of
backward induction
and then we're trying to see how can we
generalize this intuitively to
non-singleton information sets
and we have pursued a similar approach
in the first week of the class where we
have generalized iesds
to
the perhaps less intuitive but more
correct
um solution concept of rationalizability
now this week i don't think we'll have
time to go through a sub game perfect
through existence of sub-game perfect
equilibrium so we'll defer that to next
week
good
so how should we
formally define such a dynamic game
well in order to describe the mechanics
of the game
we need
a set of states that describe the
current state of the game the current
environment that the players are in
then in each state there will be
one active player who gets to decide
what happens next so the active player
has a few actions available and
whichever action they choose will
determine
how the environment evolves
and we will use a game tree to capture
this game structure
then as i've mentioned
a crucial component for the decision
making is
information that the players have
available and will use information sets
to indicate
what the players know or don't know
and then the strategy in a dynamic game
is a contingent plan of actions
given the current state and information
that the players have so this week a
strategy will not just be a single
choice of an action but it will be
a choice of an action dependent on
the information that the players have at
the time they make the decision so
formally
a strategy is now a function that maps
the player's information sets to the set
of available actions
now in order to know what kind of
strategy
the player should choose um
we need to know how players aggregate
outcomes so preferences over outcomes as
usual will be described by utility
functions
and
the play
the strategy profile that the players
choose will induce a distribution over
the possible outcomes and players
aggregate
the utilities
using
this distribution induced
by the chosen strategy profile
and so we'll define all of these
formally over the next few slides and
we'll start with game trees
a game tree is a graph
and consists of nodes as well as edges
and for a game
the edge
will have
the implication that
x2 here can be reached from x0 if
a suitable action is chosen at x 0.
now the relation
between the nodes will be a
precedence relation
so
we'll say that
x
is before x prime
and we'll write it like this if x
happens earlier in the game tree and x
prime can be reached from x
now in order for this set to be a game
tree
we need to impose some conditions on
this relation
so the first one
is that well a game 3
should flow
into
one direction there shouldn't be any
cycles
and we can do that by
imposing that this relation is
asymmetric and transitive
so transitive means that if
x is before x prime and x prime is
before x double prime and also x has to
be before x double prime and indeed we
can see that this prevents cycles
because
in this case here transitivity is
violated
actually transitivity and asymmetry are
violated because
x0 is before
x2 but x2 is also before x0
so this is not possible in a game tree
then
there's an initial node of a game tree
so there's one unique node
which does not have any predecessor
nodes so this is one node that happens
before
all the other nodes so tree will always
start at one unique route
and then lastly one condition that we
need to make this a game tree is that
each node has exactly one immediate
predecessor so this means that it's not
possible to reach some node x3
from two different nodes x1 and x2
because those those would both be
predecessor nodes
or both immediate predecessor nodes
which is which we want to preclude in a
game tree
so a tree just branches but the branches
don't grow back together and formally we
can write it like this
an immediate predecessor is one node
before x such that any other node that
is also before x
also is before x prime
so it's not possible that the branches
grow together in a game tree
and mathematically this is called ender
borisons so a set of nodes
that form a tree
now
what does this imply
about the meaning behind those notes the
meaning behind those states
today
yeah today on the 26th
um
the world chess championship is starting
between magnus carlson and jan
nipomnichi
and
yeah chess is a game that we could
describe with an extensive form game
now
at first glance we might think well
perhaps the state of the game is simply
given by the pieces on the board but
that's not actually true because
even if the pieces on the board are
exactly in the same position then the
strategic considerations of the players
may be different
they may differ depending on whose move
it is
it may differ depending on whether the
players have castled previously
so castle castling is a move in chess
where you can switch rook and king
and you can only do it at once in the
game
and
another
important reason for why
just looking at the pieces on the board
is not sufficient to capture the state
of the game it's because a three-fold
repetition of the same position is
automatically a draw so the players need
to keep track um
whether
the same position has already um twice
of twice appeared before and then they
have to avoid this position if they want
to play for a win
so what does this mean for the nodes in
the game tree well
this means that the node has to encode
not just the pieces on the board but the
entire history
of the game so that we can
induce from the history whether any of
these situations have happened
and
so this means
that yeah so that
the branches cannot grow back um
together again because we capture not
just the position of the pieces but
everything that has happened and if
there was one difference at any time
before then it will always be different
the history will always be different in
the future
i include a link here if you click on
the picture you'll
be brought to a youtube channel that
will cover the
the world chess championship
[Music]
good
now we now that we know what the store
the nodes and the states are um
let's look at the dynamics of the game
how play evolves on this tree
so there's a finite set of players
[Music]
as we've had it before but there is now
also an additional player a
non-strategic player that we call nature
nature resolves random exogenous events
over which the players have no influence
then
the outcome of a game tree
is which terminal node is reached
and
at those terminal nodes we'll denote the
set of terminal nodes by z
at the terminal nodes
each player will receive a utility
and we note here that only the strategic
players from one through n receive a
utility and this is precisely what makes
nature non strategic because nature
doesn't care which outcome is realized
then at each non-terminal node
there'll be one active player we denote
it by ix
who can choose among a few
actions that are available which we'll
denote by a of x
and
the chosen action will determine where
play evolves next so if action a is
taken
action r is taken here by nature then
player 1 will get to move over here
and nature's move will determine whether
player 1 plays against player 2 or some
third player 3.
now
because there's only one
active player at any node there's no
need here to indicate
the player for the set of available
actions so at ax it will always be the
active player ix who chooses otherwise
we would have to write something like a
of ix x and we want to avoid
unnecessarily complicated notation
so in extensive form games a of x will
simply be the set of actions
and not the set of action profiles
then
what information do the players have
available well like i've already
mentioned we want to use information
sets to capture
which states the players cannot
distinguish
um
so here in this information set player 2
cannot tell whether
ll or lr has been played
and
that's why both of those nodes are in
the same information set
now
all the nodes at which one player is
active we'll denote those by x i
and the information sets actually form a
partition of all of player i's nodes
so
player 3 here is able to distinguish
between the two nodes but player 1 and
player 2 only have one information set
for all of their nodes
now there's one additional imposition
that we have to make on these
information sets which is that
at any two nodes in the same information
set
the active player has to have the same
actions available
so
these two nodes here could not be in the
same information set because
player 3 would know simply by the fact
that he or she has three actions
available that they are in the right
node and not in the left node
putting all of this together
in one definition we have an extensive
form game consisting of all of those
pieces that we have discussed before
yeah this is just for your reference all
those i've walked through before on the
previous slides
now what can we describe with this
general
extensive form game how general is it
well so
one condition that will
determine quite significantly how play
evolves is whether information is
perfect or imperfect we say that
information is perfect
if nature has no moves and each
information set is a singleton
so this means that
at any point at any state and any node
in the game the players know exactly
what happened and they know exactly what
will happen because nature has no future
moves
and information is imperfect if there is
any non-single information set or if
nature has any moves and the information
could be imperfect for for many reasons
so one that we've already seen is in a
simultaneous move game we have an on
singleton information set
which arises because we act at the same
time as somebody else or we have no
information about what the other players
have done
and so we have strategic uncertainty in
such a situation
then
we're able to describe situations of
imperfect monitoring
which are situations where
we cannot
directly observe somebody's action but
only
we only get some stochastically related
information about it so as an example
um
nobody really knows how much i work how
many hours i put into my research and my
teaching the only thing that you can see
is the output but the output of course
is correlated stochastically
to the effort that i put in the more
effort i put in the better the output
will be nevertheless
information in this setting is imperfect
and it's imperfect because we have
imperfect monitoring
then information could be imperfect
because it is incomplete so we say
information is incomplete if there is
some uncertainty about a payoff relevant
quantity or some characteristic of the
players
in a poker game for example um we don't
know the cards that the other players
have that the other players have and
this is a setting of incomplete
information
and then we can have imperfect
information if
we have a limited memory if we start to
forget what has happened long ago then
we have non-singleton information sets
which means information is imperfect
we'll see all of those in more detail
over the next few weeks
but what i want to say here is that this
model of extensive form games is really
very general and we can describe a lot
of situations
now now that we've described the model
what can players do in it um
so a strategy
in this model is a map it's a function
from
player eyes information sets to player
eyes actions
and we'll use ai
here to denote the set of all actions
that player i has available at any point
in the game tree
and
formally it's a map such that at
information set hi player i can only
choose actions there are available to
player i at that point
and as before we'll denote by s i the
set of player i's pure strategies
and yeah so the two crucial parts here
of a strategy is
it's a function
from the available information sets so
only information that we have is
is information that we can use to make
our decisions
and the strategy
involves a plan of action for every
possible situation that we might be in
so a strategy in a game of chess is a
decision what to do for any position of
pieces on the board
or for any
state of the game which involves the
pieces on the board and the entire
history of the game up to that point
so these are pure strategies how can we
mix in the setting
well as previously a mixed strategy is a
distribution over pure strategies
and
in this case this means that we mix
over
not just actions like in the static game
but over entire
strategies over contingent plans of
actions
and
so we mix here over functions which is
not too easy not too intuitive
somewhat more intuitive would be if
for each history for each information
set
we mix we choose a mixed action
and this is known as a
behavior strategy and
again in the
this week and next week we'll see how
mixed and behavior strategies differ
so the idea is that in a behavior
strategy
in any situation that we might find
ourselves in we can choose a mixed
action to see where the game goes next
now a
mixed action here is a distribution and
we'll denote by sigma i h the entire
distribution and by sigma i h i a the
probability with which action a
is chosen
in this mixed action
now how are mixed and behavior
strategies different so suppose
you play three rounds of rock paper and
scissors against your friend in a
behavior strategy this means that you
can randomize before each round so for
each round you say okay rock with one
third or whatever and then the mixed
strategy
you take into account that you will play
three times so you'll resolve the
randomness for all three rounds in the
beginning and then play a pure strategy
throughout all three rounds
now because
a mixed strategy is a mixture over all
pure strategies you need to mix a lot
at
in the beginning in the game because you
need to mix for any possible
sequence of
of outcomes that could happen so we need
to mix if there was rock rock
you need to mix differently if there's
rock paper you need to mix differently
if there was rock scissors so this
roasted mixing is much much more
complicated if we mix over strategies
than if we mix
over actions
given the information that we have
so what's the main message of mixed
strategies versus behavior strategies we
really want to use behavior strategies
they are more intuitive and they better
reflect this dynamic setting that we're
in
the problem is that we know existence of
nash equilibrium mixed actions and not
in behavior strategies
in mixed strategies not in behavior
strategies
and
next week we will figure out when the
two concepts are actually equivalent so
that we can use only behavior strategies
going forward
okay we have described
the game mechanics
the strategies that the players can take
and the last thing that we need to know
is how players can aggregate
the outcomes or
what
distribution a chosen strategy implies
over terminal nodes
as i've mentioned before the outcome of
an extensive form game is the terminal
node reached
and if there are moves by nature or if
the players mix then the outcome will be
random so formally
the outcome is a random variable
which takes values in the set of all
terminal nodes
and the distribution of this random
variable
is given by
the probability with which you arrive
at a given terminal node and in game
three this is
the product of the probabilities with
which each action on the path is chosen
so here
if player one chooses left with
three-fifths probability and player two
chooses action b with one quarter
then in total we'll get three over
twenty probability with each arrive here
which is zero point one five
and then players can use
this distribution over outcomes to
calculate their expected utility
yeah so here
in this figure
um
now you can check that the product of
all these
um
individual mixing probabilities will
lead to this distribution
over outcomes and we can represent this
um visually
if
with the following graph here where the
size the vertical size here is the
probability with which
one
action is chosen or the other
so here um three-fifths left two-fifth
right so 60 left
40 right
and then here
60 is the total probability with which
this node is reached
and if player 2 chooses
d with 50
probability and with 25 probability a
and b then this will be the distribution
going forward
now what we can see here is that
the chosen strategy profile does not
only
define a distribution over outcomes it
defines a distribution over the entire
tree and this will be useful for players
to aggregate
utilities at intermediate points
in the game
so
formally
we can define this distribution over the
game tree
in the following way
what we do here is essentially just
formalizing
the idea that we multiply
the probabilities of each of each edge
so formally though for any node there's
a unique path with which this node can
be reached right so this node here can
be reached
exactly from x 0 then the left one and
here
and there's a unique sequence of actions
taken that lead to x so this was left
and b
and so then we just
take the product over all these
probabilities
which are given by oops
the probability with which
the active player chooses the right
action along this path
good and now we have all the concept the
all the components that we need to
describe the player's strategic
interaction in an extensive form game
the first thing that we might wonder is
how do all these definitions compare
to the static game
is this really an extension
if we have a simultaneous move game do
we get back the same
the same setting that we had the last
two weeks and this would be very
desirable because
then we don't give up any anything we
only get a generalization
so let's have a look at it
let's go back to
the birthday party example
where we don't know whether our friend
has bought a gift or not and so this is
a simultaneous move game
a behavior strategy is what we would
optimally like to work with in a dynamic
game and
because both players have only one
information set
it's just a map from
well from one information set to the set
of mixed actions
and so this is indeed exactly the same
strategies that we would have in a
static game
and
if we compute the expected utility well
what's the distribution over the
outcomes this outcome happens with
probability x y then this one with x 1
minus y this one with 1 minus
x y and then 1 minus x 1 minus y
so this is exactly
the same way in which we aggregated the
different cells of the payoff matrix and
so just to illustrate it here on the
left hand side is the expected utility
over terminal nodes and here the
expected utility over the chosen action
profile in this simultaneous move game
and they are the same
so indeed we have an extension
of static gains
now
in this model here in this game we
cannot use
backward induction so we haven't gained
anything um
by
writing this as an extensive form game
what we can do here though what we've
learned last week is we can find nash
equilibrium
and
a nash equilibrium in an extensive form
game is exactly the same as it was in a
static game it's exactly
the same definition
and this emphasizes that a nash
equilibrium
does not
make any dynamic considerations
nash equilibrium is just
choosing the strategy for the entire
game
and
if we know what the strategies
what
strategies our opponents choose then we
cannot benefit by deviating now because
there are no dynamic considerations in
the nash equilibrium we can actually
transform the extensive form game to a
related static game and use that to find
nash equilibria
and that game is called a strategic form
game
so formally we can define the strategic
form game by saying okay we're looking
at a static game
in which
each player chooses a strategy in the
extensive form game
and
we associate the payoff of that strategy
with the same
um
with the same actions in this
strategic form gain
then we can find nash equilibria
as we did last week
and i'll illustrate that
for the rest of this video here
so let's look at
a
dynamic game an extensive form game
and
we want to see if we can find
all the nash equilibria of this game
so perhaps first
we should look at backward induction
what solution would we predict with
backward induction well
we start at the back of the tree
player 1 here at their second node
should choose
bottom beta
because they get 2 instead of 0 then
now anticipating that
player 1 will choose beta player 2 will
choose top
because they get 2 instead of 0
and then anticipating that player 2 will
choose top player one at the very
beginning will also choose top because
they get one instead of zero
so the backward induction solution is
relatively intuitive and we can find it
quickly
how do how does this background
induction solution compare to nash
equilibria
well let's try to find
the static game that is
that corresponds to this dynamic game
to do that we have to choose
well to find all the pure strategies of
the players so player two has two pure
strategies because they can choose t or
b
but player one has four pure strategies
any combinations of the actions that
they have available at their two
information sets and so we can re
represent this with um those four pure
strategies where the first letter
indicates what player one chooses at the
first information set and the second one
what they choose at the second
information set
and
yeah so here just it may be
might be a little bit curious why do we
distinguish these two strategies if
player one chooses top player 1 will
never have to choose between tau
or beta
but formally a strategy involves a
decision at every information set even
if the second information set is never
reached because of player 1's earlier
action
but in terms of payoffs it will mean
that those two are equivalent
so when we look at the strategic form
game
so what we do here is we list all the
possible pure strategies for the two
players
and then we enter um the outcome to
which it leads to
so there's four outcomes here
because player one ends the game
immediately by choosing t and they all
have utilities 1 1.
if player 1 chooses b then player 2 gets
to decide whether they end the game or
not by choosing t in which case again we
see that both of them have the same
outcome
and only if player 1 chooses b player 2
chooses t then we will reach the last
information set of player 1 where player
1 can choose between tau or beta
so this is how we find
the strategic form again
and
we can now
simplify this by a little bit by com
combining
um pair of equivalent strategies
so we can combine those for for no
considerations if the entire
payoff row is identical then for no
considerations by any player will it
matter whether this action is this
action or strategy is chosen or this one
and once we eliminate all
duplicate rows or columns we arrive at
what is called the reduced strategic
form of the game and the reduced
strategic form of the game is unique
now we can solve this game
using
the same techniques that we have seen
last week and we will find that there
are infinitely many nash equilibria
where player 1 chooses top and
player 2 chooses
top with probability at least one half
let's bring those back into the dynamic
setting
now here if player one chooses top
what this really means in the dynamic
setting is
that it can mix between
t tau and t beta in arbitrary way
because in the reduced strategic form
this means that top will always be
chosen
and for player 2 this
already corresponds to behavior strategy
for player one though
because player one has more than one
information set
this is not a behavior strategy it's a
mixed strategy player one mixes at the
beginning how they will resolve
mixing at the second information set if
the second information set is reached
nevertheless
we can find an equivalent behavior
strategy
in which
player one mixes
only at the second information set over
on those two possible actions
and we will wonder
later whether this is always possible
whether we can always find an equivalent
equilibrium in behavior strategies
now let's look at some of these
equilibria
so player 1 can mix arbitrarily between
tau and beta which means they can also
choose tau with probability one
but this is
this is a nash equilibrium but it's a
bit surprising perhaps because
player one
is not does not act rationally at the
second information set because a
rational player would choose 2
and it also means that player 2 does not
act rationally
given that player 1 plays tau
right given to player 1 plays tau player
2 should choose b instead
now why is this a nash equilibrium well
because it is rational
to agree to play t and tau in the
beginning of the game like i've
mentioned a nash equilibrium
is
makes no dynamic considerations at all
right so only at the beginning of the
game we decide
what is optimal what is not optimal
and in the beginning of the game we are
willing to choose t and tau
because
those are never reached right because
player 1 exits the game
right away
and we say that
those information sets lie off the
equilibrium path they are never reached
if players actually follow strategy
profile sigma
but still using this as a solution
concept is somewhat unsettling because
because
whether or not the players want to stay
on the equilibrium path
depends what can be reached if they
deviate
right
so if
both player 1 player 2 deviate then
player 2 could get a higher payoff
and so yeah we want to preclude
sub-optimal behavior even off the
equilibrium path because
no matter how
a node is reached we think that rational
players should act optimally from there
on
in this case we have seen we could solve
this with backward induction and
backward induction um gives the more
intuitive
nash equilibrium um
where play one chooses beta with
probability one in the end
and
yeah so what we'll do for the rest of
this week is trying to combine these two
concepts
so we have now right is
backward induction which we cannot use
if there are non-signaling information
sets and then nash equilibria for which
we get very weird um very weird
predictions in dynamic games and the
goal is to combine the two
so what we've what have we done so far
we have to find extensive form games and
they are very very general they
can have
imperfect information for a variety of
reasons which makes them
a very general framework to study and
because of the generality the notation
is somewhat tedious we have to keep
track of the nodes
the active player the available actions
and
and this is somewhat tedious but it will
pay off because we can
because we can analyze many things with
it
yeah extensive form games are a
generalization of static games and we
can still find nash equilibria in the
same way that we have done before by
transforming in-game into its reduced
strategic form
then at the end after we bring it back
to the dynamic gain
then
payoff equivalent strategies
which we have eliminated when we
wrote down the reduced strategy form we
can allow any mixtures over those
strategies that we've eliminated because
they are completely equivalent for nash
equilibrium
now this is
this first video maybe leaves us with
more questions than answers
what is the
difference really between mix and
behavior strategies and can we combine
backward induction with nash equilibria
and we'll get the answers to both of
those
in future videos
good
here
mostly questions about the definition of
extensive form games to see how
comfortable you are with the mechanics
of these dynamic games
then the literature um of course
extensive form games are described in
any other game theory books and
i'm not sure actually if kuhn was the
first one to analyze them but he
is the first one who showed a major
result in extensive form games actually
the conditions under which mixed
strategies and behavior strategies are
equivalent
good that's it for the first video and
i'll see you in the next one